% !TEX root = ../thesis.tex

\chapter{Introduction}%
\label{cha:introduction}

The overall aim of this thesis is to use transaction-level data from a
financial aggregator app, insights from behavioural science, and methods from
econometrics and machine learning to contribute to a better understanding of
the determinants of how individuals spend their money and save for the
short-term.

This introductory chapter first discusses the context within which this
research takes place, and then introduces the main chapters of the thesis.


\section{Context}%
\label{sec:context}

\subsection{Financial wellbeing}%
\label{sub:financial_wellbeing_and_why_it_matters}

Financial wellbeing is a state in which a person can make ends meet in the
present, can feel comfortable about their financial future, can feel
comfortable about money, and has the financial freedom to make choices that
allow for the enjoyment of life. This includes having control over ones
day-to-day and month-to-month finances, not having to borrow to meet
ongoing obligations, being free of debt or being in control of it, having the
capacity to meet unexpected expenses, and -- for a working-age individual --
being on track to build enough savings for retirement.\footnote{The US Consumer
    Financial Protection Bureau defines financial wellbeing as ``a state of
    being wherein a person can fully meet current and ongoing financial
    obligations, can feel secure in their financial future, and is able to make
    choices that allow enjoyment of life'' \citep{cfpb2015financial}. The UK's
    Money and Pension service defines current financial wellbeing as ``being
    able to pay the bills and feel comfortable about money'' and longer-term
    financial security as ``having the savings to deal with the expected, the
    unexpected and the longer-term; or having some form of loss protection such
    as home contents or life insurance'' \citep{mps2018building}. Both
    organisations also differentiate some aspects of financial wellbeing
    depending on whether an individual is in their working or retirement age.
Throughout, this discussion, as well as in the analysis in the following
chapters, I focus on working age individuals.}

Financial wellbeing is important because a lack of it can have severe
consequences both in the short-term and in the long-term. In the short-term,
low financial wellbeing means a constant struggle to make ends meet, being
overwhelmed by debt, having circumstances dictate ones of and approach to
money, a higher likelihood of experiencing material hardship -- which
\citep{cfpb2017financial} defines as running out or worrying about running out
of food, not being able to afford medical treatment or a place to live, or have
utilities turned off -- and the need to cut back on essentials for ones
children.\footnote{For more detailed descriptions about the consequences of
    financial hardship, see \citet{cfpb2017financial, mps2018building,
stepchange2017strengthening}.} All of these experiences can cause a decline in
physical and mental health, a loss of productivity, and an overall
deterioration in the quality of life.

In the long-term, the danger is that the situation is not only self-sustaining
but leads to a vicious circle that becomes increasingly hard to escape. This
can happen purely because having to borrow for regular expenses like food and
bills -- as, the Money and Pension service estimates, about 9 million adults in
the UK do \citep{mps2018building} -- can lead to a situation where an
increasing amount has to be spent on servicing debt and thus increases monthly
expenses and the borrowed amounts required to cover them. In addition, however,
this could happen because of increasingly impaired decision making. A
literature on mental scarcity documents that our minds tend to focus on what is
scarce and neglect what is not, concentrating our mental resources where they
are most needed but reducing cognitive bandwidth in other domains, which can
lead to poorer decision making \citep{shah2012some, mullainathan2013scarcity,
haushofer2014psychology}. For instance, \citet{mani2013poverty} find that
low-income shoppers in New Jersey perform worse on cognitive tasks when first
promoted to think about their financial situation while the same prompts had no
effect for wealthier shoppers, and sugar cane farmers in India perform worse on
similar cognitive tasks shortly before the annual harvest (when money is
scarce) than shortly thereafter (when money is plentiful). There is also
evidence that scarcity might lower productivity in the present:
\citet{kaur2021financial} randomise the timing of wage payments to low-income
piece-rate manufacturing workers and find that workers that receive their wages
early and are thus no longer liquidity constrained make fewer mistakes and
increase their output by 7 percent. Hence, if the anxiety caused by having
little money to cover current expenses lowers individuals' productivity in the
present and makes it harder to engage in rational planning for the future --
how to reduce spending, how to build skills that would help find a
higher-paying job, how to transition to a healthier lifestyle that would help
them feel and perform better physically and mentally -- then low financial
wellbeing in the present might beget low financial wellbeing in the future.

The determinants of financial wellbeing are a combination of circumstantial and
external factors as well as the capabilities, believes, and behaviours of the
individual. \citet{mps2018building} provides a useful categorisation that sees
financial wellbeing as a function of four broad factors: external factors that
include economic conditions, demographics, and a person's social environment;
enablers that include financial confidence and numeracy, a sense of control,
ones spending and savings mindset, and ones engagement with money, advice, and
technology; day-to-day behaviours like managing the use of credit, avoiding to
borrow for everyday spends, active saving, keeping track of and making
adjustments to ones spending, and shopping around; and, finally, planning ahead
behaviours like building financial resilience through saving and planning for
retirement.\footnote{The US Consumer Financial Protection Bureau uses a similar
    classification in its definition of financial wellbeing
\citep{cfpb2015financial}.}

While no one factor is deterministic for financial wellbeing, research from the
US \citep{cfpb2017financial} and the UK \citep{mps2018building} agrees that, as
expected, external economic factors such as access to education and higher
paying jobs are important. In the UK, for instance, individuals with an annual
income of \pounds20,000 or below account for 41 percent of the working age
population but for 69 percent of those with less than \pounds100 of savings.
Similarly, 50 percent of people who borrow to cover everyday expenses earn less
than \pounds17,000. So, clearly, a search for and support of effective economic
and social policy measures should be an important part of any effort to improve
societal financial wellbeing. But the same research also shows that higher
incomes are not sufficient. In the UK, 18 percent of individuals with less than
\pounds 100 in savings have a household income of \pounds30,000 or higher, and
20 percent of those who borrow to cover everyday expenses have an income of
\pounds50,000 or higher. In the US, too, there is large variation in the
characteristics of individuals at each level of financial wellbeing; the
financial wellbeing of the top quarter of people with a high-school degree, for
instance, is higher than that of the bottom half of those with graduate
degrees.

In both countries, research shows that the level of savings is a key
contributor to financial wellbeing. In the US, it is the one factor that
discriminates between different levels of financial wellbeing better than any
other examined factor \citep{cfpb2017financial}. In the UK, it is, together
with behaviour towards credit, the strongest predictor of financial wellbeing
\citep{mps2018building}. In fact, research by a UK charity suggests that having
\pounds1,000 in liquid savings could reduce the probability of being in debt by
almost half. In particular, having a habit of saving regularly -- even more so
than the amounts saved -- has been found to be a key determinant. Other
factors that are positively associated with higher financial wellbeing are
confidence in ones ability to achieve ones financial goals, not using debt to
cover everyday expenses, paying ones bills on time, staying within ones budget
and spending plan, paying credit card balances in full, and checking bank
statements for errors.\footnote{For details on contributors to financial
wellbeing see \citep{cfpb2017financial} for the US and \citet{mps2018building}
for the UK.}

But many people struggle with these behaviours. For instance, in the UK, 21
percent of the working-age population (10.7 million adults) report to rarely or
never save, and 22 percent of the population have less than \pounds100 in
savings, with those holding that amount in a formal savings account being even
lower. Unsurprisingly, then, one in four adults could not pay an unexpected
bill of \pounds300 from their own money. In the US, the situation is similar,
with 30 percent of adults saying they would be unable to cover a bill of \$400.
This is problematic because many households do face unexpected financial shocks
over the course of a year. Also, many households experience high income
volatility: in the US between 2013 and 2018, the median month-to-month change
in household income was 36 percent, with low-income households experiencing
more frequent and larger income dips \citep{jpmorgan2019weathering}. The same
research finds that while families need roughly six weeks of take-home income
in liquid assets to weather a simultaneous income dip and expenditure shock, 65
percent of households lack such a buffer. In line with these findings,
\citet{roll2020income} find that during the coronavirus pandemic, households
with liquid asses of above \$2,000 had significantly lower risk to experience
financial distress (indicators like skipping essential bills, being behind on
credit card debt, being in overdraft) than households with lower savings.

\edit{Beef up with additional data and refs}

% \citet{beshears2018behavioral}: In the 2013 Survey of Consumer Finances, liquid net worth for the median household with a head aged 41– 51 is only $813, whereas at the 25th percentile it is –$1,885 (Beshears et al. 2018a).1 The picture is only slightly better for households nearing or en- tering retirement (after a lifetime of saving). Among households whose head is age 61–70, median liquid net worth is $6,213, whereas at the 25th percentile it is $1.
% 1 Liquid net worth includes all assets (except pension wealth; retirement savings ac- counts, e.g., 401(k) accounts and IRAs; homes; and durable assets) net of all debt (except student loans and collateralized debts, e.g., mortgages and car loans)


Managing debt is similarly challenging for many. 9 million people in the UK
also borrow to cover expenses for food and bills \citep{mps2018building}, and
many struggle to stay on top of their credit card debt: 2 million cards were in
arrears or default, another 2 million carried persistent debt, and for another
1.6 million cards, owners were persistently making minimum payments only.
Altogether, the study found that 5 million accounts (9 percent of the total)
that were active in January 2015 would, under their current repayment pattern
and without further borrowing, take 10 years to repay their balance
\citep{fca2016credit}. In addition to holding high and persistent balances, a
large body of research also indicates that individuals make other mistakes in
debt management, especially in dealing with credit cards: they choose
suboptimal credit card contracts \citep{agarwal2015consumers}, sometimes
because they are overly susceptible to temporarily low teaser rates
\citep{shui2004time, ausubel1991failure}; they borrow on payday loans before
while being far from having exhausted their credit card limits
\citep{agarwal2009payday}, their repayment amount is overly influenced by
stated minimum payments \citep{sakaguchi2022default}, they pay down debt across
different cards proportionally to outstanding balances instead of prioritising
high-interest cards \citep{gathergood2019individuals}, and they sometimes hold
credit card debt and liquid assets at the same time \citep{gross2002liquidity,
    gathergood2020co}.\footnote{See \citet{agarwal2017shapes} for a more
    complete review of a large body of research documenting consumer choice
inefficiencies and suboptimal financial behaviour.} 


\subsection{Behavioural science}%
\label{sub:role_of_behavioural_science}

Behavioural science can help address these challenges by understanding the
factors that determine financial behaviour and by designing and testing
possible solutions. The main factors that have been found to influence
financial decision making are: cognitive limitations and financial literacy
\citep{agarwal2009age, agarwal2013cognitive, korniotis2011older,
    agarwal2010learning, fernandes2014financial, jorring2020financial};
    time-preferences and self-control \citep{frederick2002time,
    read2018intertemporal, ericson2019intertemporal, cohen2020measuring};
    attitude towards money and spending \citep{rick2008tightwads,
    rick2011fatal}; ones perceived locus of control \citep{perry2005control},
    degree of optimism \citep{puri2007optimism}, ability to frame decisions
    broadly rather than narrowly \citep{kumar2008decision}, and propensity to
    gamble \citep{kumar2009gambles}; ones social network
    \citep{bailey2018economic, kuchler2021social}; the degree of ones financial
    planning \citep{ameriks2003wealth}; and habits
    \citep{blumenstock2018defaults, schaner2018persistent,
        de2013deposit}.\footnote{For two thorough reviews, see
    \citet{agarwal2017shapes} and \citet{greenberg2019financial}.}

Researchers have also developed and tested a large number of approaches aimed
to help people make better decisions. One main area of research here aims to
address limited self-control -- the difficulty most of us face at least
occasionally to act, moment-by-moment, in our own best interest and according
to our own goals. I briefly discuss four such approaches that have the
potential to help people make the financial choices they themselves would like
to make. A complete review of that literature is provided by
\citet{duckworth2018beyond}.

One extensively studied approach are commitment devices, whereby an individual
restricts their future choice set in order to avoid choosing a self-defeating
action. While not everybody makes use of such devices when offered the
opportunity \citep{bryan2010commitment}, and while they do not work in all
contexts \citep{laibson2015don,robinson2018some}, they have been found to help
individuals increase their savings rates \citep{ashraf2006tying}, quit smoking
\citep{gine2010put}, make healthier food choices \citep{schwartz2014healthier},
and exercise more regularly \citep{royer2015incentives}.

Another approach are implementation intentions, a particular type of planning
for the achievement of ones goals that involves ``if-then'' intentions, such as
``if I get paid, then I transfer 10 percent of it into my savings account''
\citep{gollwitzer2006implementation, rogers2015beyond}. Such intentions have
been found to support perseverance in pursuing ones goals
\citep{oettingen2010strategies} and to increase overall goal attainment across
different age groups, life domains, and types of obstacles
\citep{gollwitzer2006implementation}.

A third intervention that has the potential to alter financial behaviour is
social norms messaging, whereby people are informed about how their own
behaviour compares with that of a relevant peer group. Such information can be
especially useful for domains where such information is usually not available,
as is the case with spending and saving, and has been successful inducing high
energy use households to lower their energy use without inducing low-use
households to increase theirs \citep{schultz2007constructive,
allcott2011social, allcott2014short, brandon2017effects}. However, the
information can also backfire and has been found to lower participation in
pension savings plans \citep{beshears2015effect} and completion rates of an
online course \citep{rogers2016discouraged}, making it important to test
messages before deploying them on a large scale and to avoid unintended
consequences.

Finally, changing default options has been found to be a powerful tool for
behaviour change. Defaults are consequential because people often stick
with the status quo \citet{samuelson1988status}, and because they tend to
interpret defaults as a recommendation \citep{mckenzie2006recommendations},
implicitly view it as a reference point moving away from which would feel
costly \citet{johnson2003defaults, kahneman1979prospect}, and because even if
they resolve make a different choice, they often procrastinate
\citet{carroll2009optimal, ericson2017interaction}. Default options have been
applied across range of areas and have, for instance, been found to increase
retirement savings contributions \citep{madrian2001power,
beshears2009importance} and organ donations \citep{johnson2003defaults,
gimbel2003presumed, abadie2006impact}.

These approaches, together with many others, have the potential to make it
easier for individuals to manage their money and to spend and save in line with
their own goals. To realise that potential, however, they have to be tested on
a large scale and at low cost to gather reliable results and to have the
ability to tweak and refine them. Furthermore, solutions that are found to work
have to be deployed on a large scale to have a meaningful impact. The advent of
online and mobile banking and the large amount of data they create enable
researchers and financial institutions to do just that.


\subsection{FinTech}%
\label{sub:large_scale_data_and_fintech}

The availability of large amounts of granular data about human behaviour,
together with ongoing progress in the development of machine-learning
algorithms elicit information from them, and the increase in computer power
that allows for the storage and processing of the data and the deployment of
these algorithms, offers enormous potential for better understanding human
behaviour \citep{jaffe2014big, buyalskaya2021golden} and for building
applications that help people live in line with their goals.

Platforms like Facebook provide the opportunity to recruit study participants
at a scale and with an ease that was not possible before
\citep{kosinski2015facebook}, and data from its platform has been used, for
instance, to predict participant personalities and life outcomes
\citep{youyou2015computer}, and to study the effect of social interactions on
house purchasing decisions \citep{bailey2018economic, bailey2019house}, the
spatial structure of urban networks \citep{bailey2020social}, the role of peer
effects in product adoption \citep{bailey2019peer}, the role of social networks
in determining social distancing during the coronavirus pandemic
\citep{bailey2020social}, and the determinants of social mobility
\citep{chetty2022sociali, chetty2022socialii}. Similarly, log and sensor data
from mobile phones, another increasingly popular data source in the study of
human behaviour, has been used to successfully predict personality traits
\citep{montjoye2013predicting, stachl2020predicting}, predict levels of wealth
\citep{blumenstock2015predicting}, improve human aid targeting
\citep{aiken2022machine}, and study the role of social networks for migration
patterns \citep{blumenstock2019migration}. Some studies also combine data from
a range of sources; in one ambitious project, \citet{chi2022microestimates} use
data from satellites, mobile phone networks, topographical maps, and aggregated
and de-identified connectivity data from Facebook to map levels of wealth and
poverty at a 2.4km resolution for all 135 low and middle-income countries
\citep{chi2022microestimates}.

In the area of household finance, the advent of online and mobile banking is
creating an every growing amount of transaction-level data and a range of
FinTech apps aimed to help people manage their money. There are three ways in
which such data and apps act as critical enablers for an improved understanding
of financial behaviour and for the development, testing, and deployment of
possible solutions that help increase financial wellbeing.

First, large-scale and granular transaction data is an invaluable resource to
help researchers refine their understanding of the behavioural determinants of
financial decision making because it tends to have one or many of the following
attributes: it is collected automatically and thus more reliably, it provides a
more complete view of an individual's financial life, it spans a longer time
horizon, it covers a larger set of individuals, and the cost of collection
(though not necessarily cleaning) is zero. Accordingly, such data has already
been used to study a range of issues. For instance, \citet{kuchler2020sticking}
show that a failure to stick to self-set debt paydown schedules is best
explained by individual's present biasedness,
\citet{gelman2014harnessing,olafsson2018liquid} show that consumer spending
varies across the pay cycle, \citet{baker2018debt,baugh2014disentangling} study
consumer spending responses in response to exogenous shocks,
\citet{carlin2019generational} document generational differences in financial
platform use, \citet{ganong2019consumer} show that consumer spending drops
sharply after the predictable income drop from exhausting unemployment
insurance benefits, \citet{meyer2018fully} analyse how individuals reinvest
realised capital gains and losses, and \citet{muggleton2020evidence} show that
chaotic spending behaviour is a harbinger of financial distress.\footnote{For a
    comprehensive review of the literature using financial transaction data,
see \citet{baker2022household}.}

Second, the FinTech apps from which such data are often gathered allow for
testing and the gradual refinement of possible solutions at high speed and
relatively low cost. Furthermore, because these apps are often built to help
users manage their money, they have a clear incentive to do so, something that
is not true to the same extent for more traditional banks. Some work that tests
the effectiveness of FinTech apps aimed to facilitate money management has
already been conducted: \citet{gargano2021goal} find that an app that allows
users to set savings goals does indeed increase savings, and
\citet{levi2020mind, carlin2022mobile} find, respectively, that improved access
to financial information reduces discretionary spend and non-sufficient fund
fees.

But there is large potential for further work in this area. For
instance, while the work of \citet{levi2020mind} suggests that lowering the
cost of access to financial information can improve financial outcomes, little
is known about what design features of mobile apps are particularly helpful.
There are also features that are not currently in widespread use that could
address known biases. One example is our tendency to underestimate the power of
exponential growth. \citet{mckenzie2011misunderstanding} find that highlighting
participants in a series of experiments the effects of exponential growth
motivates them to save more. It would be easy for mobile apps to project
accumulated future savings for different monthly savings amounts, say, and thus
make the future loss from spending more money in the present more salient.
Another example is mental accounting. \citet{soman2011earmarking} find that
earmarking part of peoples' salaries as savings increases savings rates.
FinTech apps could, for instance, suggest to automatically transfer fixed
amount into labelled savings pot, thus making that money less likely to be
spent later. Finally, increasingly sophisticated ``robo-advisers'' -- financial
advise provided by machine-learning algorithms -- has the potential to
democratise personalised financial advise across an increasing number of
domains, from portfolio allocation to consumption decisions to debt management
\citep{philippon2019fintech, dacunto2021new}.

In testing and refining possible solutions, the large size of the data is
critical because it allows for the identification of heterogeneous effects and
allows for the appropriate customisation of solutions. Having a view of users'
entire financial lives -- as in the case of financial aggregator apps that
allow users to add accounts from all their different financial providers -- is
also critical, since it allows for the identification of unintended
consequences; for example, inducing credit card users to make higher automatic
card repayments may increase automatic repayments but leave the total repayment
amount unchanged \citep{guttman2021semblance}, and auto-enrolling employees
into pension schemes might increase their debt levels
\citep{beshears2022borrowing}.

Finally, FinTech apps will make it relatively simple and cheap to make
effective solutions and tools widely available to a large audience, which is
critical to the goal of increasing financial wellbeing on a large scale.

All these opportunities from ever-growing data and increasingly sophisticated
algorithms and powerful computers bring -- like all innovations -- a set of
challenges. They can, for instance, compromise individual privacy and propagate
social biases. Inevitably, technological progress has largely outpaced
regulatory responses, and it will take time to understand all the implications
of these new technologies and enshrine proper safeguards into law. In the
meantime, leading researchers in the field are charting the course in thinking
about how to work with these data and tools responsibly
\citep{demontjoye2015unique, kosinski2015facebook, blumenstock2018don}, and
private companies as well as research institutions have put in place
safeguarding procedures to ensure that such best practices and current
regulations are followed at the level of individual research projects.


\section{Thesis outline}%
\label{sec:objectives}

This thesis consists of three stand-alone chapters that all share the overall
aim of combining transaction-level financial data, insights from behavioural
science, and statistical methods to better understand how individuals spend and
save money -- with the ultimate aim of producing insights that can inform the
design of tools aimed to increase financial wellbeing. A particular focus is on
studying ``emergency savings'' -- short term savings accumulated as a buffer
against unexpected financial shocks -- because such savings, as we have seen
above, are a critical component of financial wellbeing and because, in contrast
to other components like pension contributions, it is understudied. Apart from
\citet{beshears2020building}, who study design options for automated
contributions to emergency saving pots, and \citet{phillips2021supporting}, who
test such a design in the UK, there is no research on how we can help
individuals build such emergency savings.

Chapter~\ref{cha:mlbt} introduces and tests a new method that allows
researchers to elicit for individuals in a large datasets behaviour traits of
the type used in lab and survey studies. This work contributes to the overall
thesis purpose indirectly in that it aims to augment the information contained
in large datasets with additional information that opens up additional avenues
of research and helps researchers fully leverage the data in their study of
human behaviour. \edit{We test our method...}

Chapter~\ref{cha:entropy} tests whether the way individuals spend their money
is related to how frequently they make transfers into their emergency savings
funds. We ...

Chapter~\ref{cha:eval} ...








%%% meta objective

- link to replication crisis - see davidthesis


- vision ahead of reality

\begin{itemize}
    \item I use a single dataset, provided by Money Dashboard, for all three
        papers.

    \item The data presented a number of challenges.

    \item Handling data of this size.

    \item Secure storage with easy remote access (AWS).

    \item Consistenc and efficient preprocessing (my process).

    \item Open science contribution: all work available on Github, code
        available for preprocessing from beginning to end.
\end{itemize}

\paragraph{Motivation:}%
\label{par:motivation_}

My experience as a researcher in well-known academic and private-sector
institutions has made clear to me over the years that careful, reliable, and
replicable data preprocessing is undervalued in many settings.

The result are plain data errors that overturn results (Reinhard and Rogoff)
and replication issues (see Ariely controversies). Given my experience, I'd
think that all we know is the tip of the iceberg.

In the vast majority of empirical research projects there is no good reason to
not make the code public, even when the data is proprietary. And yet, for the
vast majority of papers, there is no code available to replicate findings and
check precise implementation details, which often matter but are not described
in papers.

All of this harms science - the quality of it and the trust in it.

I have dedicated a lot of time during my PhD to ensure that I can rectify at
least some of those issues.

The code for all my projects is available online and includes scripts that can
be used to easily run the entire analysis.

